Each and every organism can live only for a certain period
of time. The period from birth to the natural death of an
organism represents its life span. Life spans of a few
organisms are given in Figure 1.1. Several other organisms
are drawn for which you should find out their life spans
and write in the spaces provided. Examine the life spans
of organisms represented in the Figure 1.1. Isn’t it both
interesting and intriguing to note that it may be as short
as a few days or as long as a few thousand years? Between
these two extremes are the life spans of most other living
organisms. You may note that life spans of organisms are
not necessarily correlated with their sizes; the sizes of
crows and parrots are not very different yet their life spans
show a wide difference. Similarly, a mango tree has a much
shorter life span as compared to a peepal tree. Whatever
be the life span, death of every individual organism is a
certainty, i.e., no individual is immortal, except single-celled
organisms. Why do we say there is no natural death in
single-celled organisms? Given this reality, have you ever
wondered how vast number of plant and animal species
have existed on earth for several thousands of years? There
must be some processes in living organisms that ensure
this continuity. Yes, we are talking about reproduction,
something that we take for granted.
Reproduction is defined as a biological process in which an
organism gives rise to young ones (offspring) similar to itself. The offspring
grow, mature and in turn produce new offspring. Thus, there is a cycle
of birth, growth and death. Reproduction enables the continuity of the
species, generation after generation. You will study later in Chapter 5
(Principles of Inheritance and Variation) how genetic variation is created
and inherited during reproduction.
There is a large diversity in the biological world and each organism
has evolved its own mechanism to multiply and produce offspring.
The organism’s habitat, its internal physiology and several other factors
are collectively responsible for how it reproduces. Based on whether
there is participation of one organism or two in the process of
reproduction, it is of two types. When offspring is produced by a single
parent with or without the involvement of gamete formation, the
reproduction is asexual. When two parents (opposite sex) participate in
the reproductive process and also involve fusion of male and female
gametes, it is called sexual reproduction.
What do you think – Is vegetative reproduction also a type of asexual
reproduction? Why do you say so? Is the term clone applicable to the
offspring formed by vegetative reproduction?
While in animals and other simple organisms the term asexual is used
unambiguously, in plants, the term vegetative reproduction is frequently
used. In plants, the units of vegetative propagation such as runner,
rhizome, sucker, tuber, offset, bulb are all capable of giving rise to new
offspring (Figure1.4). These structures are called vegetative propagules.